We were at a meeting
of our congregation in the city of Oryol.
But then one of our ministerial servants
came running to me and said,
“Dennis, you have to go in the hallway.”
“OK, OK.”
I then went in the corridor,
and there were people standing there in masks
—a lot of police officers
and a lot of FSB people.
They showed their IDs and said
that they were going to search our hall.
I certainly didn’t know
exactly what to do in that situation.
I mean, this is the first time for me.
But I know one thing:
that I am an elder in this congregation
and the shepherd of my brothers and sisters
and that I must keep them safe
and try to keep them calm.
And then I was sure that the situation
would be resolved sooner or later.
They behaved very rudely at first.
But then after a few minutes,
they completely calmed down,
sat there in the front row,
and looked at me with very strange faces,
as if they said:
“Look, what are we even doing here?
“Here are grandmothers, women, and children.
Well, it’s all peaceful and quiet.”
I was sure everything was legal on our part
when they told me,
“So Dennis, we’ll take you in for two days.”
I thought: ‘Well, it’s no big deal,
and it’s going to be resolved.
‘Two days is something I can live with.
Other brothers and sisters were in prison
before me, and I can do it too.’
And I was sure, too,
that Jehovah was protecting me.
I think it was 11 o’clock in the evening.
They took me to the cell.
I arrived in my suit.
I had a jacket, a tie, and a shirt.
And you might say that the other prisoners
looked at me like I was from the moon.
I didn’t know what lay ahead of me.
I also had no experience of being in prison,
but I decided,
‘OK, I need to take the first step.’
Then I came to the other prisoners and said,
“Hello, my name is Dennis.”
The hardest part
was being separated from my wife, Irina.
I was really worried about her health:
‘Does she have what she needs materially?
‘Are they hounding her as well?
Will she end up next to me in prison?’
A lot of thoughts were on my mind,
and that’s why the first two months
were the hardest for me.
The detention center is located
so that you can’t
generally see the prisoners, right?
I tried to find a place
where I could see his window.
And just from his window,
he could see me well.
And so we agreed that I would go there.
Dennis told me what time.
That was my favorite time,
you might say, of the whole day.
I was looking forward to 1:00 p.m.,
my opportunity to see Irina.
It was only five to ten minutes.
For two years we had this routine.
Irina came every day!
In the snow,
in the rain, in bright sunshine
—no matter what the weather was,
every day she was there.
It was our little secret that we reveal now.
For two years,
we didn’t tell it to anyone at all.
He used to write me really funny letters
and draw some funny drawings
to make me laugh a little bit
and cheer me up,
because we are that sort of family.
We’re always laughing and making jokes.
I really tried my best to be a good husband.
When I was in the detention center,
I tried to call her twice a month.
I tried to write her letters
five times a week.
I would be thinking beforehand,
all day before the call,
about what I wanted to tell my wife.
What do we want to talk about on the phone?
What are interesting topics?
What funny things happened to me
and what good things?
I wanted my dear Irina
to feel that she was the most
beloved wife on earth.
I wrote about different spiritual questions
that I read in the Bible.
I wrote a little bit about love.
I mean, that’s important.
But that’s also why, in principle,
it turned out very well.
I had friends supporting me,
coming over, visiting.
I got a lot of letters,
and so did Dennis.
There were people who said,
“Whenever you’re having a hard time,
you can call and text;
“we’ll come over.
“We could go on a walk with you.
We could take you shopping
so you won’t feel lonely.”
They offered all sorts of help,
and I am very grateful to them.
And there were even sisters
who cooked for me.
It was a very great encouragement to me
when the brothers in the congregation
prayed for my husband and also for me.
They asked that Jehovah
would give us the strength
to endure everything,
that we would be able to keep our joy
in spite of the situation.
And that was very nice.
I felt that they cared for me personally.
I was very worried about my pioneer ministry
because I was so busy with different matters.
I didn’t know how
I could find time for the ministry.
So I talked to Jehovah about this,
that I wanted to continue to pioneer,
and he answered my prayers
in a very interesting way.
The best preaching territory I’ve ever had
was the detention center.
I met a lot of interesting people there
because I spent hours waiting in line
to leave food for my husband
—sometimes two, three, or four hours.
The longest I waited
was five and a half hours.
So I had the opportunity
to talk to different people.
And people came not only from Oryol
but also from different cities,
villages, and even countries.
And it was unique
because many people
had never even heard of Jehovah’s Witnesses,
and I was very grateful to Jehovah
for giving me the opportunity to serve him
even in such circumstances.
I understood that Jehovah
truly understood me,
understood my needs,
so much that he fulfilled all my desires
even in the smallest detail.
He understands what is important to me,
what is valuable,
and he is ready to provide it for me.
It’s early spring.
It’s still cold,
and there are no leaves on the trees yet.
There’s still this dirty snow.
And somehow I don’t like this time.
I remember looking out the window
and talking to Jehovah.
I said: “Jehovah, somehow I feel sad.
I want something beautiful;
I want beauty.”
Well, I talked to Jehovah,
and the next day
one of the sisters from our congregation
came and gave me a big bouquet of flowers.
And, interestingly enough,
that wasn’t the only gift,
because as soon as those flowers wilted,
another sister brought the next bouquet.
And this went on
until it was beautiful outside,
when the leaves were already blooming,
when the flowers
in the front gardens were blossoming.
I viewed my time in prison and in the colony
as my assignment from Jehovah.
I was sent there
not only to serve my sentence
—I was sent there to preach,
to talk about Jehovah,
about the Bible, about Jesus,
about the Kingdom of God to other people
who maybe couldn’t listen at home
because they were in prison.
I decided right away
that sadness and discouragement
were not for me.
Well, it’s not the best place on earth
(to be in prison), right?
It really, really isn’t.
But people live here too,
and life goes on.
With the help of Jehovah and his spirit,
it’s also possible here to experience peace
and joy of heart—to be happy.
During the court sessions,
I tried really hard to show the brothers
and sisters that came to support me
that I was doing well.
And so, yes, I often talked to them
in the court and smiled at them.
Thank you for coming.
Sometimes I also showed
the children’s drawings that I had.
I really wanted
to strengthen and encourage them
so that they could understand that,
yes, Jehovah is with me,
and if something happens to other people,
our brothers and sisters,
they shouldn’t be afraid.
Dear brothers and sisters,
I really appreciate your support.
I am very happy for all your letters,
for all your thoughts, for all your prayers.
I really appreciate it a lot.
I try to do my best,
and I try to serve Jehovah
in the best way that I can.
I will do that forever.
And I also really liked my husband’s attitude,
that he was a real shepherd to the sheep,
because those people
who came to the hearings
would leave in such good spirits, uplifted.
And they would tell everybody
how interesting it was in court,
and so they kind of energized other people
and encouraged them to come to the hearings.
I started praying diligently
about learning to love my enemies
because now I had to communicate
a lot with the Investigative Committee,
with the FSB, with the courts,
with the employees of the detention center.
And this is the kind of place
where people are not very friendly.
It’s amazing
how Jehovah answered this prayer.
For example, the head of the detention center
treated me very well.
He said: “How can I help you?
“What can I do for you?
If you need help,
always come to me.”
The thing I realized is that all judges,
prosecutors, and detention center staff
are ordinary people
who need to hear the good news.
And I tried to show them by my behavior
that Jehovah’s Witnesses are peaceful people.
During the trial,
I particularly remembered
the support of the brothers and sisters.
It’s wonderful!
And it would have been
a lot harder without that.
I had a lot of court sessions
—at least 75.
I really appreciate it.
Thank you.
There were brothers and sisters
at every hearing.
But I always thought,
‘If you only knew how much it means to me
to have you here.’
Sometimes there were a lot;
the hall was overcrowded.
And I know, too, that many of them
have sacrificed their time
and asked to leave work just to be there
to strengthen and support me.
Sometimes brothers and sisters
also attended the hearings
from other cities.
And sometimes maybe they wrote a little sign,
a sign that says:
“We’re from such and such a city.
“Hang in there, Dennis.
We love you!” and so on.
It was very encouraging to me.
And I thought:
‘Oh, yes, life is hard,
‘but they took the time,
‘time to be there for me in these tough times.
‘It’s just wonderful.
It’s amazing!’
I do not agree with this judgment.
This is a big mistake.
But thank you, everybody, for coming.
I am very happy that you are here.
Thank you!
When I got my final sentence of six years,
then there were
a lot of people in the audience.
Most of them were human rights activists,
journalists,
and our brothers and sisters.
I was also prepared for this,
for this verdict,
and it wasn’t some kind of surprise to me.
I took the verdict completely calmly.
Of course,
separation from my husband is terrible.
When I came to the prison,
I remember one incident in particular,
talking to the deputy head of the prison.
He knew I was from Denmark;
he knew I was one of Jehovah’s Witnesses.
He said to me:
“Dennis, well, yes, in Denmark
“you have a different prison system,
“but here in Russia
a man has to suffer in prison.
“In this prison, you won’t preach.
“Here you won’t talk to others about your faith,
about the Bible.
Do you understand that?”
I understood that they wanted to break me.
It was especially clear to me
when they sent me
to the punishment cell again and again.
I was worried about my husband
when he was in the punishment cell
and not being able to talk on the phone at all.
For eight months,
we didn’t talk to each other.
We only had letters.
How I dealt with it:
Well, here again I decided a long time ago
that sadness and discouragement
were not for me.
I really avoided these thoughts.
I was very strict about my attitude
because I knew, basically,
as it says in Proverbs:
‘If you’re sad,
then your strength also disappears.’
I knew it would be a long struggle,
and I wanted to endure.
When I came to the prison,
I didn’t have a Bible.
But when I went to the library,
what Bible did I find there?
Half of the New World Translation.
I took it right away.
The first part is the Russian synodal;
the second part is the New World Translation.
I tried to read the Bible every day
like I was supposed to
and to meditate.
I did have a special notebook
where I wrote down good thoughts
from the Bible that would strengthen me.
When the mind is overflowing
with these positive thoughts,
then there’s no room for negative thoughts.
So every morning after the morning check,
I would then have my Bible reading.
Bible verses helped me
to stay calm and joyful.
For example,
I often remembered Isaiah 30:15,
where it says that we have to ‘keep calm
and trust in Jehovah.’
And that is our strength.
Another scripture is Romans 12:21,
where it says
that we need to ‘conquer evil with good.’
Why is that important?
Because the prison world is not kindergarten.
There are real criminals,
people who behave badly.
I tried not to act like the other prisoners,
not to be aggressive.
I was constantly thinking about that:
‘What I see is bad.
‘I have to conquer this
‘not with evil but with good.
I have to remain a Christian.’
Another scripture
that has also strengthened me
is Psalm 84:11,
which says that for those who act blamelessly,
Jehovah does not deprive them of blessings.
This means that if we do the right thing,
even though everyone else
around you does their own thing,
Jehovah does not rob us of our blessings.
Of course, in difficult situations
you absolutely have to pray
because you can’t calm down without it.
Sometimes when I was having a hard time,
I prayed more than once.
I tried to make my prayers more specific.
I thought a little bit beforehand about, well,
what I wanted to talk to Jehovah about.
One sister wrote to me in a letter,
“If you want your prayers
to mean something to Jehovah,
then they must mean something to you too.”
And very often I prayed
that I’d have peace in my heart,
that Jehovah would help me
to keep my joy, to be happy,
because I wanted it to be that way.
Sometimes when we were standing
during the morning check,
the other prisoners would say to me:
“Dennis, you are smiling again.
What are you thinking about?”
And then I said, “I just remembered
something good, something nice.”
And everybody was laughing at me then.
Although prison and the colony,
yes, they’re not the best places on earth,
but they’re not the worst either.
And when you remember why you’re there
and when you’re busy,
busy doing good things
—maybe when you’re writing letters
to other people,
to brothers, sisters, children,
the elderly or maybe when you’re preaching—
yes, then it’s really an opportunity to be happy.
That’s the joy that all of us
are supposed to have.
It’s not connected to what’s around us;
it’s connected to what’s inside you.
I often thought too:
‘Yes, OK, you can steal my freedom.
‘Yes, you can make me not see my family
‘and not be able to hug them
as often as I’d like.
‘But inside,
I will not let you steal my peace;
‘I will not let you steal my joy.
‘I want to be happy, to serve Jehovah,
to do as he wants
because he is a happy Father.’
And I love him.
And actually, I realized right away
that you can’t feel sorry for yourself
in any way and think,
‘Why did this happen to us?’
These are very bad thoughts,
and I tried to reject these thoughts
as soon as they appeared
and replace them with something positive.
And it worked.
Dennis once wrote this interesting phrase,
“If you want to be happy,
make others happy.”
And that thought helped me a lot.
So this verse is also very dear to me,
2 Corinthians 1:3, 4:
“Praised be the God and Father
of our Lord Jesus Christ,
“the Father of tender mercies
and the God of all comfort,
“who comforts us in all our trials
“so that we may be able to comfort others
“in any sort of trial
with the comfort we receive from God.”
This verse helped me to understand
that I don’t need to focus on my own problems,
but having received comfort from God,
I need to go and comfort others,
because there were so many people
around me who needed help,
needed to be reassured,
needed kind words and joy.
And I was always busy.
I was always looking for opportunities
to help someone
—who to visit and who to bring groceries to—
or to visit the sick.
It was difficult
when I was in the pretrial detention.
After all, it’s a pretrial detention center.
That meant that everything I said there
could have been used against me.
Then when I was in the prison camp,
I had a little more freedom
because in the prison camp
there’s an opportunity
to get a personal visit for three days.
That means that my wife
can come and visit me.
There you can go in your own clothes;
you can cook your own food,
well, and socialize.
And I was perfectly aware that my dear wife
works very, very hard outside.
She’s always busy like a bee.
So I made a routine that when she came,
I’d prepare the food.
I’d cook; I’d wash the dishes.
I wanted her to feel like my guest
—to enjoy, to rest, to come home.
I really needed that at the time.
And when I came to the prison,
it was certainly a joyful time.
We had a lot of fun those three days.
I was so grateful to my husband
that he took very good care of me.
Honestly, our relationship became stronger
when Dennis was in prison
because I had never heard
so many loving expressions from my husband.
I have a Bible example
that I hold even more dear now
than I did at the beginning of my imprisonment.
It’s, of course, the apostle Paul.
Because when I read his letters now,
which he wrote while he was in prison,
I sometimes feel
that I have exactly those kinds of thoughts.
I feel like I understand him even more.
And I really wanted to be like him
and to act like him.
What was Paul doing when he was in prison?
He tried to preach, talk to others.
But what else did he do?
He wrote letters.
And so that was the motivation for me.
I had a goal.
I tried to write three letters a day.
I wanted to strengthen others;
I wanted to encourage them.
I wanted to spread a little bit of joy
because I love
my brothers and sisters so much.
A member of the prison staff said to me,
“Dennis, I can see that you’re very joyful.”
I said: “Yes, I’ll be free soon;
“all my thoughts are there right now.
“It’s like I’m not here.
I’m already out there.”
Then he said to me,
“Look, Christensen, you’ve never been here.
“You’ve always been on the outside.
“You’ve always been free.
You’ve always been joyful and happy.”
I also imagined that day many times:
when I’d go out,
when I’d see my brothers and sisters again
and my family,
and when I’d hug them.
I’m in the car then
—handcuffed, driving around—
and I see all of our dear brothers
and sisters out there.
Even though I only saw them for five seconds,
even though
I only heard them for five seconds,
it really strengthened me.
I can just say
that my heart was jumping with joy,
and I’m very grateful
to these brothers and sisters.
I was amazed at the number of people
who were already there.
They got there early,
and they were people
from completely different cities.
They prepared posters,
they blew up balloons,
they gave me a lot of flowers
—just huge bouquets of flowers—
and they said very beautiful words.
So it’s unique that you’re not alone
in this situation
—that, really, we’re one big family.
After that,
we had an eight-hour ride to the airport.
It was very exciting that,
yes, we were going to the airport.
Soon it’s all over,
and I can be with Irina again.
When we arrived in Moscow at the airport,
then Irina met me with my lawyer
and the airport police.
Well, actually, it was OK but a little tough.
OK.
Eight hours in this car.
When we were at the airport,
I saw that some people
smiled at me a lot.
And I knew right away that these
were our brothers and sisters.
And the immigration officer
looked around like that and said:
“Are these all yours?” and I said,
“Yeah, they’re friends.”
And then Dennis went to hug everybody.
There were so many
of our friends at the airport.
I’ll tell you, if I smiled before,
I smiled even more then.
It felt so good!
And it shows one more thing:
that what a love we have between us!
It’s real.
I’m crying.
I’m sorry.
Well, first of all, I would like to say
that today is a happy day
—a happy day because I,
at least I, got freed the prison
and I came home to Copenhagen, Denmark,
where I can again be together
with my friends and my beloved family.
I would also like to say that I’m very glad,
and I appreciate
all that the brothers and sisters
have done for me in these five years.
I had no brothers and sisters close to me.
I’ve been, you could say,
alone for five years in prison.
But I never felt alone.
I’m home in freedom with my family,
with my wife,
but my thoughts also go to all
of our dear brothers and sisters in Russia,
because many of them are still suffering.
I have always felt that Jehovah’s hand
was never too short
to save, to support, and to help.
And I am sure, 100 percent sure,
that this will also happen to them.
Many people ask me:
“Oh, Dennis,
has the prison time crushed you?
Did they break you?”
No way!
Never ever!
I had the goal that I would go out of prison
even stronger in a spiritual way
than I was when they put me in.
And you know what?
I am more determined than ever
to be faithful to Jehovah,
more determined to preach the good news,
to help other brothers and sisters
and other people to gain their goals.
The goal is eternal life in Paradise,
where we will all have the opportunity
to serve and praise Jehovah forever.
So, no, I’m not broken.
No, I’m not crushed.
I’m still here.
I’m back!
Now we’re back in Denmark.
Here we have to start a new life,
start from scratch.
I know it’s not going to be
all smooth sailing for Irina,
but I will be there for her.
I will definitely support her, help her,
and I will continue
to try to be a good husband
and will continue to show that I love her
and will take care of her.
We had an invaluable and unique experience
that we really want to use to help others.
We really want our brothers and sisters
to know that it is possible
to survive and that Jehovah is near.
And you should never give up;
you should never lose heart.
I’ve learned to trust Jehovah
and to rely on him completely
and not doubt that he will find
the best way out of any situation.
Jehovah showed that he will always help.
I can tell you that all these trials
—they strengthened my faith.
I’ve seen that Jehovah is right beside me.
I’ve seen that Jesus leads our organization
in a wonderful way
and is a very caring King,
because there were different needs.
He met them all.
There were different problems,
but he helped me to cope with them.
So, yes, it was as if Jehovah
became more real to me.
You could say that prison is a very good school
to polish your Christian qualities.
Jehovah also knows
that we are only little people.
He won’t expect more of you
than you can give or do,
and that’s enough.
Use what you can in all situations.
Yes, do what you can,
and Jehovah takes care of the rest.
I’m out now,
and I’m very happy about that.
But my prayers for my brothers and sisters
who are still in prison haven’t changed.
On the contrary,
I pray for them even more now
because I know what they’re facing there.
It’s not always easy,
but I’m also sure that Jehovah
helps them as he helped me.